---
title: 'visual effects in UI design'
date: '2006-05-28T12:22:24-07:00'
status: draft
exported_permalink: '/?p=244'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 244
category:
    - Uncategorized
tag: []
post_format: []
---
“It turns out that besides our normal visual processing region of the brain (you are using the [occipital lobe](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Occipital_lobe) right now while reading this blog) there is a second region that deals with attention capture.  
“We experience it everyday. While talking with a friend at a park someone throws a frisbee to another person in the background. Without trying you notice this change of motion even though you are not looking directly at it. You can thank the [superior colliculus](http://www.wayfinding.net/collicul.htm) for this little attention interruption.” — [Bill Scott](http://looksgoodworkswell.blogspot.com/2006/03/mind-hacking-visual-transi_114376913301122246.html)

I’ve talked a lot about how we, as humans, are evolved to have a tremendous facility with processing visual input and that we should take advantage of that when we design graphical user interfaces. It’s neat to know a little about the details about how the brain works and to highlight that we actually have different specific capabilities for how we process visual input.

Bill Scott has been creating a [catalogue](http://developer.yahoo.com/ypatterns/atoz.php) of a number of very specific UI patterns, highlighting examples that use animated effects. This catalogue sometimes highlights the purpose of an effect, and sometimes merely highlights the effect. In using animation for the cinematic user interface, I think it is important to separate the machanics of how the effect is created (our toolbox of animation options) from the purpose that we are working to achieve.

The mechanics are merely different combinations of scale, rotate, translate, and fade for different pixels or areas of the screen, but it is helpful to think of them as you might use them as “canned” effects. Examples:  
– motion: wipe, cover, reveal, push  
– 3D: flip, pivot, page turn, ripple  
– open/close: barn door, iris  
– cross-fade, fade to black/white, blur  
– scale (shrink/expand)  
– rotate: spin (usually combined with scale: e.g. showing a newspaper in film), combined with motion

The purpose of why you use an effect is much more interesting:

- **What just happened?** Teach about the effects of navigation. Explain how the application has changed state as a result of user action, usually by moving and scaling an element so one representation of it leads the eye towards where it is placed on the next screen.  
  – move primary screen elements directing the eye to a button which will return the app to that state  
  – expand the area of action to full-screen, fading out or moving other elements out of the way  
  – make room: keep last screen in context by shrinking it to provide space for new element ([Laszlo Calendar](http://www.laszlosystems.com/lps/sample-apps/calendar/calendar.lzo?lzt=html))  
  – transform space: shrink some elements to make room for new ones ([Laszlo home page](http://www.laszlosystems.com/))  
  – iconify: shrink an area of the screen as it also moves, at the end of the animation make a button appear, that when clicked on reverses the animation and opens the area
- **What will happen?** (call to action/invitation)  
  – roll over deedback: change color or other graphical treatment to indicate “hot” area on mouse roll over  
  – cursor change  
  – blink (use sparingly, but is used effectively for text insertion cursor)  
  – status message: in context or in a “status bar” display additional text info on mouse roll over
- **Draw attention.** Sometimes application state will change as an indirect result of user action. You need to call attention to a different area of the screen or to the same area after time has passed.  
  – spotlight: change color to highlight where action has taken or will take place  
  – bounce: use motion to announce a change in state
- **Confirmation.** People need to know that whatever they just did had an effect. The simple case of this is a mousedown/mouseup visual effect on a button when it is clicked — an effect familiar from desktop apps, commonly broken in web applications. There are other visual effects that can provide similar feedback:  
  – slide away panels after action is taken (alternate to simply vanishing a dialogbox)  
  – highlight the chaged area and fade out ([37signals yellow fade](http://www.37signals.com/svn/archives/000558.php))
- **please wait**: animation that shows the computer is busy
- **additional information in context**: display new information in the locus of attention  
  – tooltip: a floating element that appears after the mouse has hovered for a short time  
  – expand in place: often for errors (in response to client- or server-validation or initiated from user action)  
  – slide out panel: may overlay other content, or “push” other panels to make room  
  – flip panel: an area of the screen appears to flip over to reveal more info