---
title: 'interviewing&#8230;'
date: '2006-10-25T22:11:39-07:00'
status: draft
exported_permalink: '/?p=260'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 260
category:
    - Uncategorized
tag: []
post_format: []
---
I’ve been doing a lot of interviewing lately. Actually, I’ve been doing a lot of interviewing for must of my adult life. I just read [Joel’s take](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/GuerrillaInterviewing3.html) on interviewing and I respectfully disagree… (those of you who think I should be more confrontational in my blog can read: I think he’s full of shit)

Six people in one day is a hefty interview. For managers and other cross-functional folk sure, but for engineers, I say you should know in three or four. Bring the candidate back for a second interview to meet the team if you are pretty sure about the candidate or if you are really on the fence, but don’t waste everyone’s time otherwise.

Never, ever let anyone on your team tell you they don’t want to hire someone because they “didn’t like them.” They need to tell in detail why the candidate would not be an effective contributor to the team or would be difficult to work with or just plain un-inspirational. For crying out loud! Engineers, of all people, can apply a logical analysis to their interview de-brief. And if the interviewer is a junior engineer who can tell you why exactly the candidate would be a good fit, then feel free to ignore their input.

The more important question is whether there are people on the team who are lobbying for the candidate. If there is not one single interviewier willing to say “Yes! I really want to hire this one.” Then forget it. Your typical hire gets an unequivocated thumbs up from every interviewer.

So, in part I do agree with Joel, not to hire the maybes; however, I am absolutely willing and often eager to hire a maybe on contract. The problem with never hiring the maybes is that you risk only hiring people like you. No matter how much we try to be unbiased, we tend to favor candidates that fit a certain profile, whether it be gender, class, race, or simply a preference for emacs or for those who write lisp compilers for fun, in a weekend.

If you have a bunch of excellent candidates, go ahead and interview them all the same week and make a quick decision. I think engineers should have great communication skills, so I think it is okay to be biased by a good resume, but if you have three great resumes (followed by 3 great phone screens), give ’em all the benefit of an interview. You want the very best for your team. And if you are lucky, and more than one is really awesome, you’ll be able to make room for one more.