---
title: 'in memory of ilya: thoughts on courage and empathy'
date: '2011-11-20T12:48:11-08:00'
status: draft
exported_permalink: '/?p=3456'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 3456
category:
    - general
tag: []
post_format: []
---
I didn’t know Ilya well. We’ve had maybe 20 minutes sum total of one-on-one conversation in all of my hanging out with the [Diaspora](https://joindiaspora.com/) team over the last year or so, but he was a close friend of close friends. There’s a certain transitive property of friendship, and with certain individuals there’s an influence that is felt beyond the immediate social graph.

When I heard of his passing, I couldn’t relate to the techcrunch or NYT coverage which did not revere him in life, but I felt that Mike Sofaer said it well:

> Ilya Zhitiomirski dreamed a better, freer future, and threw himself completely into building what he dreamed. A star is missing from my sky — [@MikeSofaer](http://twitter.com/#!/MikeSofaer/status/135808277261983744)

I was scheduled to give a short talk to help kick of the Women 2.0 Startup Weekend in San Francisco, long before the world lost Ilya’s shining light. I felt that would be a fitting celebration of Ilya’s life, even if I had to miss the latter half of the memorial service. I was glad to hear some of his friends speak, including Sarah Mei’s [epic eulogy](https://joindiaspora.com/posts/850422). However, I decided to shorten my talk on [Mobile Lean UX](http://www.slideshare.net/blazingcloud/mobile-lean-ux) to tell the crowd of 150 prospective startup founders a little bit about Ilya, Diaspora, and what I think is most important to consider when creating software.

Ilya and his co-founders focused on a really big problem — of how to create freedom without compromising privacy. I thought that Ilya might have described it as giving people the freedom to engage with diverse friends and acquaintances without giving up their data to the dragons. Despite taking on a problem with huge technical challenges, Disapora was born on a hack night — they sliced out a small focused part of the solution and set out with a clear beginning. I encouraged the crowd to focus on a problem, and seek the simplest possible solution which could solve some meaningful part of the problem.

I reminded everyone that software development is about people. It takes courage to start something, but most importantly it takes empathy. It is easy to forget that software is a means, not an end. We build web and mobile applications to solve problems for humans. I suggested that they avoid the word “user” to describe someone whose problems they seek to solve — we should build apps for teachers, architects, bicyclists or whatever specific group of people. I retold the old saying that it is only software developers and drug dealers who call their customers “users.”