---
title: 'career path, life lessons'
date: '2013-08-26T21:57:40-07:00'
status: draft
exported_permalink: '/?p=4345'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 4345
category:
    - general
tag: []
post_format: []
---
Alright. So, this is, my intro slide, these are screenshots and box shots back when we used to do… release software in boxes, of all the different products that I’ve worked on. And I’m really excited to talk to you today about my path and how I got from… I’m gonna talk for just a few minutes about my early life, and how I got started in computer programming, and then the kind of winding path that led me through entrepreneurship, to doing a lot of creative software development. So, what I’m probably most proud of is my work on After Effects, that Luisa mentioned. You’ve probably seen the result of After Effects in the movie theater; however the software looks like it does below and that was the first breakout success software that I built.

I also worked on both Shockwave and Flash. I was on the original Shockwave team, and then worked on Flash later. If you’ve used a computer, it’s likely that code that I wrote was on that computer, you may have even run it. But first, let me tell you about my growing up. I grew up in New York City… I was born in New York City, I lived there for two years, but then my family lived in a bunch of different places all over the world. When I was in fourth grade, we lived in the Philippines, and I learned Tagalog. I went to a Catholic school, with 2,000 girls, there were two Americans at that school, and I learned what it was like to be one of a very few people.

Of course, at that time in the Philippines, the populace generally credit America with giving them their freedom, and so I was kind of like a celebrity even though I was a minority. And unfortunately, I later learned that America was actually pretty oppressive there through, Dole pineapple and various companies that didn’t pay very well. But also, at that time, it was under Martial Law under Marcos and I didn’t really understand what that meant because I had to be home by dark, anyhow.

But the next year, we moved to El Salvador, where I became fluent in Spanish, which had completely replaced Tagalog for me, I completely forgot, other than a few words in Tagalog, and El Salvador, at the time, was in the midst of a civil war. The very, very rich in El Salvador. The very, very rich in El Salvador were oppressing the very, very poor and taking away their farms, and often killing them, and the United States was providing arms to the government in that country, and I was kind of horrified by the actions of my country. And I came back to the US, and read in the newspapers about how, what the US was doing in El Salvador was an anti-communist initiative, which was not what I learned when I was living in that country.

So I came back to the US and I protested on Washington, and I got very involved in activism, against what I saw as things that were inappropriate that the US was doing overseas. And I thought that I would have a career in International Relations, I really wanted to change the world for the better and I felt that my parents’ generation had created a mess and it was my generation’s responsibility to fix that.

But meanwhile, my mom was laid off from teaching and decided that she was going go into the next big thing and sell computers. She wasn’t very technically savvy and so I learned how to use a computer. At that time, Apple computers came with a basic manual, and I read the manual and learned how to do high-resolution computer graphics, which looked like this at the time. And so I would program the computer to draw lines and I thought this was really neat. And a lot of the people that I knew assumed that I would go into computing as a profession, but I felt that a career in computing would be like having a career in Rubik’s cube It’s really fun, but is this what you really wanna do with your life? I didn’t really think at that time that computers could solve any really significant problems in our world. And, of course, I was wrong, and a lot of people didn’t really see that in the day. I think there were some people that definitely did.

So, next, I’m gonna take you through a very brief tour of my career path, and specifically highlight four decisions I made that made a really big difference. And from those four decisions, I’ll introduce a couple of tbe four life lessons that I want to impart to you today. I made a thousand, a million, decisions, and you’ll never know which decision is gonna make a difference, but these are the four that did for me. So four decisions, four life lessons.

One of my big first decisions was the college I went to. I decided to go to Brown University. I completely disagree with Odetta, most people who go to college have no idea what they wanna do. I picked Brown because Brown taught 13 foreign languages, and you remember I wanted to into International Relations, I wanted to learn all of them. I was really interested in how, when you speak a different language, you kind of think to say different things and it influences your choice of words. It kind of affects the connotation of what you say, and that that is responsible for a lot of misunderstandings in the world, and I just thought it was really interesting. So, I audited some languages classes, but at Brown at the time, the language classes taught literature, which was interesting but not really my passion, so I didn’t take those classes.

And I thought well, “Maybe what I want to study is linguistics.” So I audited some linguistics classes. But the linguistic classes, at the time, at Brown taught dead languages. They taught Latin, Sanskrit, Ancient Greek, which is again, kind of interesting, but not really my passion. So, I was like “Well, maybe I’m not that interested in language”, which was kind of the wrong assessment. But I heard some great advice which is to take classes in college based on the teacher, not the subject. So my first life lesson is learn from great teachers. I ended up studying visual art which is also a passion of mine, studio art, and computer science which I took as a backup ’cause I figured if I’m taking an art degree, I better do something practical.

I still enjoyed programming, but still could not imagine that being a career. I had taken a year and a half off between high school and college, so I ended up graduating in December. And the summer before my last semester, I joined a bunch of guys that I went to college with and started a company called “The Company of Science and Art”, very, very much kind of my thing, and we did a bunch of different things. And this is the team that I worked with. They were really great people, and in some ways, my colleagues at CoSA saw things in me that I didn’t even see in myself. It really fundamentally affected me that my first work experience was with people where we had mutual respect for each other, where we learned things from each other, where we created together, and that was a really valuable experience and we ended up creating After Effects together. So the next life lesson is work with great people.

I left CoSA right before After Effects was released because I was in love. My then boyfriend and I had decided that we were gonna move across the country when I graduated, and I delayed that for a year and a half, but then finally, I said, “Alright, this company, I love it, I’m having fun, but I don’t know if it’s ever really gonna pay the rent.” Again, I was wrong about that. But we bought a telephone van that looked like this, we packed up all our stuff, and we moved to California where I had gotten a job at Apple Computer, which I thought was pretty hot. It was a product that they wouldn’t even tell me about when I applied for the job in networking, which I thought was really interesting… I hadn’t studied that in school, the way that the computers talk to each other. It ended up being the worst job I’ve ever had in my life. It was terribly boring and the product was a dismal failure.

But I met a great person there, his name was Harry Chesley and I learned from him about internet protocols. He was at SRI when TCP/IP was invented, which is like the fundamental layer of the internet that like everything runs on. And he told me stories about how they did this and what it was like back when there were four computers on the Internet. And I was fascinated by that but I just really didn’t like the work there and I ended up going back to COSA. And three weeks before, they were acquired by Aldus, and then nine months later, Aldus was acquired by Adobe. And I found myself, once again, at an enormous company. It was probably 1,200 people at the time and I just felt like another cog in the machine, and I didn’t want to be there.

And so, Harry had gone to this company called Macromedia to work on this product called Director and figure out how to make it work for interactive television. So, at the time, this was in 1995 which was two years after the web was standardized, right around the time that Netscape had broken off from the kind of research institution where it had started. Everybody thought that what was gonna run on your cable TVs, with interactive television, people would be doing kind of interactive film stuff and that that was the next big thing.

But everybody I had known who worked on that TV project had been laid off two years later. So I said, “Well Harry, I’m really excited to work on your project, but I really like this idea you have of prototyping it on the internet, and if I can work on the internet side of it, then I’ll take the job.” And so he convinced his boss to have two people work on the internet and two people work on iTV, and I signed up to Macromedia in June 1995 before they had a website. Three months later, we were all working on the internet, and we released Shockwave, six months later, turned out to be a good thing to learn about the internet in 1995.

So, lesson number three, follow your heart. The direction that your heart is pointing you may not be the right direction, but the key thing about following your heart is when you get to the right place, you will know it. And that’s what your heart tells you. And so the path may be winding, but also, pay attention to what you do outside of your work because that’s gonna last much longer than any particular job and the people that you connect to outside of your work are as valuable, more valuable, than the people you’ll know in your career. So, in 1995, I had the opportunity to work with Netscape’s APIs and release one of the very first plugins that made it so that you could do audio, and motion graphics, and interactivity without a full page reload. And that was really exciting. I got to see the rise of the web. But one of the things that I had learned from Harry is that the internet was actually created… Does anybody know when the internet was created?

A: 2000?

2000? No, way before that. What?

I was just kidding

I actually don’t know the year the internet was created, but it was like way, way before I was born. The internet was created… It came out of kind of the information technology stuff that came out of World War II and it was created as a project, I think in the ’60s by the… It was sort of a combined project with MIT and this research institute, SRI, and the government as a communications medium that would survive a world war. So, one of the reasons the internet is tremendously resilient is ’cause it was designed to survive war. Like any node can go down and as long as some parts of the internet are alive, then people can have communications. So I was really struck by the fact that what came to consumer excitement was basically brochure ware, like you had these pages that would… Companies would be like, “Oh, here’s my product.”

And I got excited about actually creating things that would allow web applications to communicate with each other in real time when I created an ill-fated project called the Shockwave Multiuser Server, and then joined Johnathan Gay on the Flash team to create Flash video. And we’d created two-way audio and video. People built a lot of applications that looked like this and of course, what was enormously successful was the broadcast video that enabled sites like YouTube. So that was pretty exciting to be involved with. And I saw the internet go from on the left, 35 million users, which sounds like a lot in like 1995, but most people you knew didn’t really know what the internet was and most people weren’t using the internet, to in the 2000s, it became a household term. Everybody had an email address. Everybody could access the web.

And I reflected on my career and I thought to myself, I’ve done all these like really exciting things and built software that’s used by hundreds of millions of people but I’ve never set out to build a piece of software that I didn’t know exactly how… That I could build it. I’ve never really taken a risk in my life. I’ve taken risks like moving across the country, taking a job that I didn’t know whether it was gonna pan out. But that’s not a real risk, because then I can just get another job. I was really skilled and I knew that I was working in an industry where I was really easy to get jobs for somebody of my skill.

So I decided that… I was then working at this company called Laszlo Systems. I was a Director of Engineering leading a team of about 15 or 20 people, and I decided that I wanted to start a new company. But maybe I didn’t know the people that I wanted to start a company with. And maybe I didn’t know what the product was gonna be. And maybe I didn’t know what technology I was gonna use. So I said, “Okay, I’m gonna take a year off. I’m gonna do an independent consulting while I find or create my next startup. And I am going to attempt to do things where I have no idea whether I have the capability of doing this thing, but I will think through what will happen if I fail and I’m not gonna do anything if I can’t live with it” ’cause at that time, I had a house and kid and a family, and I couldn’t just… I didn’t have enough saved. I mean, all of this exciting stuff allowed me to buy a house in San Francisco, that’s cool, but I had a mortgage and I had to make a living.

I set out on this path and I found that often, what I would have thought about as a failure and been afraid to take a step because of that failure, actually wasn’t that bad. It was just not the desired outcome. And so it enabled me to set out to do things that were much bigger and bolder than I’d ever tried to do. And that difference means that at this time, now that I’ve taken some risks, I’m still not working on things that are yet household names, but as you seen the stuff that I worked on, it wasn’t famous for five to 10 years later. And I don’t know whether any of these things will end up being household terms. And it doesn’t matter because I…

I’m creating a startup, Mightyverse, which I am passionate about. I think that I have a potential to maybe build some software that can make it so that people can communicate across languages and break down barriers of communication across the world. And it doesn’t matter if I do that for a 100 million people, if I do that for a few people that will make a difference in my life. And I’m running this company, Blazing Cloud, that consulting for a year turned into four years, turned into a company that I now lead that has 20 people. That’s half women, half men. And what I’m most proud of is not the gender diversity. The fact that we have designers and we have computer scientists, and we have people who are passionate about sailing and we have people who are passionate about farming, and making clothes, and they have other things that they are excited about in their lives. But 9:30 to 6:30, they work on creating software, but they bring all of that creativity into their software creation endeavors. And I think it lets us make the best software ever.

And I’m really proud of founding RailsBridge, which is now been in 15 or 17 cities across the globe and trained thousands of women who might have not otherwise thought they could program. And probably 30% of them are women who are already programmers who just didn’t know the next new thing. And we’re creating communities of software developers that look like communities anywhere in the world, that do anything. And I agree with Odetta and the folks at Google that if we’re going to solve the very, very real and urgent problems that can be solved with software, we need to have the people who create the software be reflective of our society and understand those problems. So, I’ll stop now and I want to invite you to ask me questions about anything and I’m happy to answer them.

\[pause\]

19:05 SA: Yes.

19:05 S?: What is Blazing Cloud thing?

19:07 SA: So Blazing Cloud writes applications for hire. So we do product development, mostly mobile development. We’ve released few dozen iPhone apps and iPad apps and Android apps.

19:23 S?: So, do you have to be good in math to be a programmer?

19:26 SA: Good question. Do you have to be good at math? So I used to work with a guy at Apple who would say, whenever math came up, “I was told there would be no math.”

\[laughter\]

A: Because especially these days, there’s very, very little math. If you do well in application development, you won’t do any math. If you do computer graphics, 3D computer graphics, particularly, you do need to understand linear algebra which sounds very complicated, but actually the math that you use is no more complicated than stuff that you already know. If you go into computer graphics, you need to know basic algebra and then with that, you can learn matrix transformations. But most of the fancy math, the computer does for you and then there are a few people who actually do implementations of the math algorithms and if you’re into that, you can do that, too. So I think the reason that I’m good at software is kind of something Luisa talked about which is because I’m good at language. Because one of the magical amazing thing about making software is as soon as you describe something, it exists. And so it’s all a matter of naming things and describing what they need to do and then they can work on their own. There’s an adage in computer science that there are only two hard problems, naming and cache invalidation. The second one, you can learn about later but naming is a very hard problem and if you’re good with language you’ll probably be good with programming.

Q: What is a good major to get into or a background to know?

A: So a good major. So computer science is a great major, although one of the things that I’ve learned hiring which surprised me was that, there are a lot of computer science programs where you do very little programming. So it’s my belief that it’s best to learn the abstract stuff through the doing of it and if you don’t learn the practical aspect of programming, that you’re a little out of touch with what the abstractions mean. But there are colleges where you’ll take one class or two classes that have programming, and the rest will be like this math abstract arguments about graph theory and what they call “NP complete problems” which are problems they think are unsolvable and things like that, which I find very dry and boring. I had to take one class like that in college, which I was failing the first time I took it. At Brown, one of the awesome things about Brown is if you withdraw the class, you’ll get no credit, and then you can take it again. So this class, I literally got a C on every assignment and I failed the midterm and then I just dropped it, and said, “I will take it next year.”

So the next I was like, “Okay, this is really hard, I’m gonna figure it out.” The other thing is, I refused to talk with TAs, I was really shy as a child and a young woman in college, and so I didn’t realize that the TAs are sitting in this room waiting for you to ask them a question. But I was intimidated to go talk of them, so I created my own study group with a bunch of the women and guys who I was, was in this class, and I went to every TA hour and I did every single assignment and then I ended up getting a 100% on the final exam. Everybody in the study group hated me. But I had a really hard time with the stuff that I couldn’t draw to something that was tangible. Well, as tangible as a computer software can be…

So, computer science is a great major, but I would recommend studying what you love, whatever that is, and taking a few programming classes, no matter what. Because I think computer programming is a certain kind of literacy that we’re all going to need. Starting my own business, I felt for people who were non-tech people starting own businesses. There was so much software that I had learn to use, there was terrible software that I could just do in a few hours because I understood the underpinnings. And over and over again, in my life as a CEO, I do these things that are so much facilitated ’cause I understand what the machine is doing.

So, I believe that everybody should learn programming for the same reasons that you learned photosynthesis. It’s not that we learn photosynthesis because we’re all going to be biologists, it’s ’cause that’s how our world works. It helps us understand the impact of the decisions we make in our lives. The same reason we should understand Newtonian physics because it’s not that you’re gonna become a physicist, it’s that these are… The law of gravity is kind of important in your life. We should understand how the world works and we don’t know what we’re gonna do that’s gonna be an application of that. I think everybody should learn statistics. I took a statistics class, I can never remember it. Every time I have to do statistics, I have to go look it up on Wikipedia. But having fundamental skills, having learned it once, means you can do it again.

One last question?

Alright. Well, I have something. One more story. I have a present for Luisa. So, in the late ’90s and early 2000s, when I was doing a Flash video, I had had a lot of role models in my career, but they were all men. And I had decided early in my career that I was going to not select my role model on the basis of gender because that’s kinda dumb, but I had a lot of these very wonderful technical leaders that influenced me. I was thinking, “Okay, now I want to see a woman who’s ahead of me, who I can aspire to”, and the women at Macromedia who were executives have left the technology track. And I talked to each of them and I just felt, “Okay, these are amazing women leaders, but these are not me. This is not who I aspire to be.” And I started looking farther afield than I had… I struggled to find somebody who is living their life the way that I wanted to. And my best friend from high school gave me this book, which is called “Nobel Prize Women in Science”. And there may be more now but this is about the 50 women who received Nobel prizes in science.

And I started reading this book. I still haven’t finished it. But I got to the story of Emmy Noether. And Emmy Noether got her… She studied Math in Germany in the early, I think, ’20s, 1920s, and she, at a time, when women could not teach at a college level, her only career options were to like teach French. Her dad was a mathematician and let her have a study group so that she could hang out with the guys who were into math. And she had this study group where, amongst the people who came to Emmy’s study group, was Albert Einstein who had these ideas about relativity, but wasn’t very good at math. And Emmy showed Albert how to create equations for the fundamental theory of relativity.

And she was just so excited at the opportunity to do math, that she didn’t stop what she was doing because there were other people who said, “Yeah. All you’ve got is a little study group. You don’t get to teach at the university.” And she taught under somebody else’s name because of the joy of teaching. And then she was the first woman to get paid to teach at a college level in Germany in the early 20th century. So, that inspired me to just forget about this whole like, “Yeah. I’m going to do blah-blah-blah whatever”, and to just do what I love, and that really led me to where I am now.