---
title: 'human responses to stress: not all fight or flight'
date: '2015-10-17T11:22:10-07:00'
status: draft
exported_permalink: '/?p=5728'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 5728
category:
    - Uncategorized
tag: []
post_format: []
---
The “tend or befriend” model of how women respond to stress, published in [2000 paper (Taylor, et al)](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10941275), perhaps applies to men as well.

> Tending involves nurturant activities designed to protect the self and offspring that promote safety and reduce distress; befriending is the creation and maintenance of social networks that may aid in this process.

A [2002 summary paper](http://web.missouri.edu/flinnm/pdf/GearyFlinn2002.pdf) highlights parenting by male humans, where research supports a biological basis for tending behaviors over flight-or-fight in male parents, as well as evolutionary evidence for “befriending” patterns. The paper points out that “laboratory studies and studies of stressors in Western societies are not always representative of the stressinducing  
contexts that were likely to have been of importance during human evolution.”

While the exact mechanisms for stress response may be quite different amongst men and women, it is good to read research that supports the notion that our approaches may actually converge, ending up with similar techniques, causing us to work effectively together as parents, as well in wider society.

[Reciprocal altruism](http://greatergood.berkeley.edu/images/uploads/Trivers-EvolutionReciprocalAltruism.pdf) explains a more complex system where humans sometimes respond to stress by taking great risks to save other humans, and in less dramatic examples of bird warning calls and cleaning symbiosis. Basic mathematics can explain how an act of altruism makes sense if reciprocation might be expected; however, it becomes much more complex since we know there are “cheaters” in our population — people who will never reciprocate.

> Given the psychological and cognitive complexity the system rapidly acquires, one may wonder to what extent the importance of altruism in human evolution set up a selection pressure for psychological and cognitive powers which partly contributed to the large increase in hominid brain size during the Pleistocene.

Recent research suggests that the our behavior depends to a large extent on our environment, not just how we were raised but the social context in which we live and work every day. And this context can be change. ([Women Don’t Ask](http://www.amazon.com/Women-Dont-Ask-Negotiation-Strategies/dp/0553383876), chapter 7, Kindle Locations 3172-3174)