---
title: 'the untold story of people leaving tech'
date: '2017-06-11T22:19:03-07:00'
status: draft
exported_permalink: '/?p=6270'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 6270
category:
    - Uncategorized
tag: []
post_format: []
---
“Unfairness costs companies an estimated $16B per year,” not including costs to reputation that can make it harder to attract new talent and can even affect sales.

“Four categories of unfair treatment, behaviors, and experiences were explored: (1) Unfair people management  
practices, (2) Stereotyping, (3) Sexual Harassment, and (4) Bullying/Hostility.”

“Observing unfair treatment in the form of stereotyping, bullying, and sexual harassment was also significantly related to leaving  
due to unfairness, suggesting that the impact of negative treatment and workplace culture extends  
beyond those with personal experiences of unfair treatment and also affects turnover decisions  
among one’s colleagues”

78% of employees reported experiencing some form of unfair behavior or treatment, while 85%  
witnessed or observed unfair behavior or treatment in their previous workplace.

Women of all backgrounds experienced and observed significantly more unfair treatment overall  
than men

Individuals in the tech industry experienced and observed more unfairness than those employed  
in non-tech industries (p&lt;.043; Appendix, Table 2). This suggests that tech companies may have  
significantly more challenges in both culture and employee treatment.

Unfair experiences were perpetrated by senior-level employess, significantly more often than  
junior, mid, or executive level employees.

Nearly 25% of underrepresented people of color (both men and women) experienced  
stereotyping in their previous job

1 in 10 women in tech reported experiencing unwanted sexual attention in the job they most  
recently left.

LGBTQ employees were most likely to be bullied (20%) and experience public humiliation or  
embarrassment (24%), both at significantly higher rates than non-LGBTQ employees (13%, p&lt;.01).

White and Asian males experienced bullying (16%), public humiliation (16%), and rudeness (25%)  
more frequently than underrepresented men (9%, 11% and 19%, Figure 6).

Bullying and hostility were most often perpetrated by senior-level employees (53%)