---
title: 'interruption science'
date: '2005-10-22T13:45:48-07:00'
status: draft
exported_permalink: '/?p=193'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 193
category:
    - Uncategorized
tag: []
post_format: []
---
<iframe class="wp-embedded-content" data-secret="yvSFpsKivV" frameborder="0" sandbox="allow-scripts" scrolling="no" security="restricted" src="https://www.nytimes.com/svc/oembed/html/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.nytimes.com%2F2005%2F10%2F16%2Fmagazine%2Fmeet-the-life-hackers.html#?secret=yvSFpsKivV" title="Meet the Life Hackers"></iframe>

“To perform an office job today, it seems, your attention must skip like a stone across water all day long, touching down only periodically.”  
Yet while interruptions are annoying, Mark’s study also revealed their flip side: they are often crucial to office work. Sure, the high-tech workers grumbled and moaned about disruptions, and they all claimed that they preferred to work in long, luxurious stretches. But they grudgingly admitted that many of their daily distractions were essential to their jobs. When someone forwards you an urgent e-mail message, it’s often something you really do need to see; if a cellphone call breaks through while you’re desperately trying to solve a problem, it might be the call that saves your hide. In the language of computer sociology, our jobs today are “interrupt driven.” Distractions are not just a plague on our work – sometimes they are our work. To be cut off from other workers is to be cut off from everything.

For a small cadre of computer engineers and academics, this realization has begun to raise an enticing possibility: perhaps we can find an ideal middle ground. If high-tech work distractions are inevitable, then maybe we can re-engineer them so we receive all of their benefits but few of their downsides. Is there such a thing as a perfect interruption?