---
title: 'minority viewpoint'
date: '2006-05-21T19:23:50-07:00'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=240'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 240
category:
    - Uncategorized
tag: []
post_format: []
---
A few weeks ago, a friend of mine mentioned some research she had read where when you are part of a minority group which is less than 30% of a larger group, if affects your behavior, what you say, and how what you say and do is interpreted. (She’s not in tech, but a professor, where there are also a minority of women, less than 20% in her group.)

Once when I was working at Apple (my second job out of school), I went to lunch with a group of colleagues. At some point we were talking about an issue that tended to divide by gender like whether pornography was fundamentally evil or something like that, and at one point someone turned to me and asked “what do women think about this, Sarah?” When we had gone to lunch it had been a few of us from the human interface testing group going out with some of the folks on the other side of the hall who worked with the network protocols — a roughly 50-50 split. Suddenly I was conscious that I was the only woman with 6 or 7 men. Not unusual and normally quite collegiate, but suddenly uncomfortable for a twenty-something just-of-college young female geek. I was not just being asked my opinion, I was being asked to represent the woman’s point of view. I suddenly wondered what Sharon or Mary thought about pornography and imagined that whatever I said would be used to put them on the spot. It was quite possible that my opinion didn’t jive with the other women in the department. I wish I had had the self-confidence to be righteously outraged that this fellow could ask me such an absurd question assuming that if there was a “woman’s perspective” that I knew it. I studied CS, not anthropology. Instead I was awkward and made a joke and dodged givng my opinion on his behavior or the topic of discussion.

When you are a minority, it is impossible for you not to be affected by that. It is typical for minorities to believe that what they are feeling, only affects people like them. While people in the majority easily believe that whatever they feel is universal. I may be a member of a minority gender in my profession, but I’m also part of a cultural majority — I’m white; I started coding at age 12; I studied CS; I read Science Fiction; I liked Star Trek. When I identify with the majority group, it’s easy to think of my experiences as universal. When I identify with the minority, it’s easy to believe that my feeling are my own or only affect the small group I belong to.