---
title: 'smart objects'
date: '2006-12-31T10:12:15-08:00'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=264'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 264
category:
    - Uncategorized
tag: []
post_format: []
---
I ‘ve actually been thinking a lot about this. I’m cc’ing the diamond list in case others have ideas to chime in. It is really important at this phase of the project that we figure out how to effectively communicate the ideas behind what we’ve built and what powers the product will bestow on developers, now and in the future.

I don’t really think of Smart Objects as a conversation between apps, but would be interested in your thoughts on that. I think of them as objects with associated behaviors that an application can define and then provide to another application. I think about it like me giving you a physical object that you can do something with like rocking chair or a coffe mug, except there is associated data, like a business card. The application can decide whether it copies data from the object (like dragging a contact into an email composition window) or keeps a reference (like adding a contact into a contact group). When an object is sent to another user (like thru IM) it must make a copy, but IM can still use associated views or behaviors.

I’m not familiar with DDE, but regarding Microsoft’s OLE/COM and Zimbra’s ALE, that’s a good analogy to start with; however, those technologies are centered primarily around taking a all or part of a document and viewing or editing it within another document — these are based on ideas stretching back to the 19060s like what Doug Engelbart called an “inclusion” in his original work on hypertext (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doug\_Engelbart) and Ted Nelson’s notion of a “transclusion” in his vision of Xanadu (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transclusion). Smart Objects reference data from other applications and allow other applications to provide the display and UI for particular data, so they share common inspiration with the technologies you mention.

The Smart Object concept is a further evolution of the modern GUI. (Perhaps a closer heritage to Ivan Sutherland than Engelbart for the history buffs.) The object can be directly manipulated via drop-and drop, and the design center is more around smaller pieces of data with associated behaviors and potentially multiple views. In the future, the framework will likely offer right-click menus, cut/copy/paste and other actions that the end user might expect. In the meantime, those actions could still be implemented by a developer.

This concept came out of our long-history with traditional desktop UI as well as web UI combine with experience creating web applications and client-server apps where the end-user experience is centered around viewing, editing, organizing and sharing data. We also saw a big gaping hole with web tech where today it is hard for one developer to leverage the work of another developer without simply copying their code. Aside from the GUI aspects, the client-server data sync-ing is really important and merits discussion, but it’s time to get Jack ready for school…. perhaps Adam can chime in there.