---
title: 'how we read email'
date: '2007-06-26T07:08:19-07:00'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=276'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 276
category:
    - Uncategorized
tag: []
post_format: []
---
People have been communicating via email for over 40 years. For most people, their time with email has been substantially shorter, but nonetheless email is ubiquitous. It is a seemingly simple application: we receive messages and send them. Messages are displayed in a list and may or may not include attachments, pictures, or text formatting.

As with any application, there are design decisions that become like muscle memory. If a different email app does it differently, it is just broken. One of these that I have been investigating lately is fundamentally related to whether you read email “up” or “down.”

I read most recent first, then I’m not in danger of replying to a message where there has already been a reply. I can quickly scan or immediately delete threads that have already come to resolution, and I usually find the more urgent messages more quickly. I used to read “up.” It seemed logical to me that new messages were appended to the bottom, so I would start at the bottom and keep selecting messages above. This was facilitated by Eudora (my original favorite email app) and later by Thunderbird. When I moved to Laszlo Mail as my primary email address, I was initially frustrated because I felt that I was readling my mail upside-down. But all of the other webmails seemed to default to most recent at the top, so I admitted that I was a minority use case and it didn’t take me too long to adjust my perspective.

My friend Dave reads email in the order that email was received. This is pretty logical, so he can read through emails with the full context of when they were received. Apparently, Mac email software Apple Mail and Entourage are designed for this use case. When you read and then delete an email from the middle of the list, the email above it is selected.