---
title: 'Wagner and the cinematic experience'
date: '2007-07-18T05:23:54-07:00'
status: draft
exported_permalink: '/?p=297'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 297
category:
    - Uncategorized
tag: []
post_format: []
---
http://users.belgacom.net/wagnerlibrary/prose/wagartfut.htm

Sarah has another interesting post in her blog, nice thoughts on Cinematic  
User Experience.  
http://tinyurl.com/yns26u

The main reason that I’m working with all of you is exactly that concept:  
Cinematic User Experience! If there wasn’t such a concept, I wouldn’t be  
interested in Laszlo or OpenLaszlo, it would just be “another technology”,  
cool, but with no spirit.

Besides Apple no other company (Microsoft with Silverlight, Adobe or even  
Macromedia) came up with a vision for the future internet, which will  
contain cinema (TV, multimedia?) like interfaces with customized components,  
media integration (convergence) and all of that across multiple operating  
systems, players (runtimes) and devices.

And even Apple doesn’t have something like a “cinematic tradition” (like  
Laszlo, even the company name hints to one of the leading figures in the  
definition of the term “multimedia”).

So here’s what I know: it all started in some way with Wagner; another  
connection to Marc Canter, his opera singing, Germany and a book, mentioning  
Marc, called:  
“From Wagner to virtual reality” http://www.artmuseum.net/w2vr/contents.html  
Well, here’s Wagner:

German opera composer Richard Wagner believed that the future of music, music  
theater, and all the arts, lay in an embrace of Gesamtkunstwerk or total  
artwork, a fusion of the arts that had not been attempted on this scale since  
the classic Greeks. In 1849, Wagner wrote the essay, The Art-work of the  
Future, defining the synthesis of the arts in which opera served as a vehicle  
for the unification of all the arts into a single medium of artistic  
expression.

The Festpielhaus (Festival House) Theater opened in 1876 in Bayreuth, Germany,  
where Wagner applied his theatrical innovations including: darkening the  
house, surround-sound reverberance, and the revitalization of the Greek  
amphitheatrical seating to focus audience attention on stage. This approach to  
opera foreshadowed the experience of virtual reality, immersing the audience  
in the imaginary world of the stage.  
A nice video explaining Wagner’s vision can be found here:  
http://www.artmuseum.net/w2vr/video/Wagner.mov  
(German with English subtitles)

A few years later we had “Space Light Art” – Early Abstract Cinema and  
Multimedia (http://tinyurl.com/2uoo28)  
This essay discusses the evolution of abstract cinema and multimedia in the  
first half of the 20th century, through the synthesis of film, performances  
and installations. Beginning in the first two decades of the century, European  
avant-garde artists influenced by Wagner’s “Gesamtkunstwerk” (Total Artwork)  
experimented with the relationship of cinema to painting, music, sculpture and  
other arts. In Germany, this experimentation led to the abstract or “absolute”  
films of Viking Eggeling, Walther Ruttman, Hans Richter, and Oskar Fischinger.  
The 1916 Futurist Manifesto in Italy declared that cinema would combine all  
the arts, and create a new art form.

German abstract painter Walther Ruttmann wrote in 1919 about ‘painting with  
time,’ which he believed would be accomplished through film. “And so a type of  
artist will emerge who is quite new and previously only latently in existence,  
placed somewhere between painting and music Š In any case, the new art can  
count on a considerably larger audience than painting currently enjoys Š” \[1\]

The first documented public event combining abstract film with other media was  
in 1921 in Frankfurt, when Ruttman premiered his film Lichtspiel Opus I with a  
live string quartet. Max Butting composed the score for the film, and Ruttmann  
played cello. Ruttman hand-tinted the black and white film, painting thousands  
of frames over several years. The film was described as moving paintings in  
time; reviews spoke of a new art form. This event was enormously influential  
not only on the development of abstract or ‘absolute’ film, but specifically  
on the work of a young filmmaker in the audience named Oskar Fischinger.  
This German movement of absolute films was  
described as:

“Malerei mit Zeit” \[painting in time\] (Ruttmann); “Bewegungskunst” \[art in  
movement\] (Eggeling); “Augenmusik” \[visual music\], “Lichttonsinfonie”  
\[symphony of light and sound\], “zeitraumliche Eurhythmie” \[eurythmics in space  
and time\] (Diebold), and “Kinomalerei” \[cinematic painting\] (Yvan Goll)Š \[2\]

And within “From Wagner to virtual reality” we meet a figure, well known to  
all of us:  
http://www.artmuseum.net/w2vr/timeline/Moholy.html  
László Moholy-Nagy | Theatre of Totality

Bauhaus artist László Moholy-Nagy undertook a wide range of aesthetic  
investigations, using the school as a laboratory to examine the formal  
principles of abstraction in painting, photography, and sculpture. He also  
explored the influence of technology, which had a profound impact on his work  
and ideas. These experiments led Moholy-Nagy to develop a new kind of theater  
based on these principles. Underlying this approach was an effort to  
synthesize the theater’s essential components ­ space, composition, motion,  
sound, movement, and light ­ into a fully integrated, abstract form of  
artistic expression.

Moholy-Nagy referred to this idea as the theater of totality, a  
reinterpretation of Wagner’s concept of total theater. Moholy-Nagy’s approach  
to the synthesis of the arts reduced the importance of the written word and  
the presence of the actor, placing them on an equal plateau with stage design,  
lighting, music, and visual composition. This interest in formal integration  
included technology, which is reflected in his use of mechanical motifs in his  
work in other genres such as painting, photography, film and sculpture.

So here we have the theater’s essential components, which are relevant to OL  
as well:  
a) space  
b) composition  
c) animation  
d) sound (media)  
e) movement  
f) and light (which includes colors?)

And of course the content which needs to be presented (the story we are  
telling, narrative UI?)

We can see the term “cinematic” making it’s way into architecture:  
http://tinyurl.com/2at4ev  
Cinematic City, Time &amp; Space: perception and appropriation of film in  
relationship to architecture  
What is the influence of film on the production, perception and use of  
architecture? Since film has everything to do with the organization of time,  
and architecture with that of space, a parallel research line concerns the  
relationship between time and space, as conceived within both disciplines. To  
carry out this research, the city of Rotterdam serves as a case-study, being  
both a city of film and a city of architecture. Films about Rotterdam are  
analysed, together with architectural complexes related. Additionally,  
film-essays, with statements on time and space, whether visual, structural or  
in terms of content, are analysed. The main theoretical framework therefore is  
that of cultural connectionism, providing a link between general sociological  
developments and cognitive processes. On a conceptual level the notion of  
Multipolis is coined, as an urban-narrative model.

An urban-narrative model? I think it’s time to analyze how user interaces we  
experience with computers every day make their way back into lifestyle,  
design and architecture.

So how does the big guy, Marc Canter, fit into this?  
http://www.artmuseum.net/w2vr/overture/datawork.html  
By the late 1980s, multimedia, which had been at the fringe of the arts and  
sciences, reached critical mass and went mainstream. Marc Canter, who  
developed the first commercial multimedia authoring systems, was a chief  
catalyst. Canter pioneered software tools that artists and designers used to  
create multimedia on their personal computers. His authoring systems  
synthesized text, images, animation, video and sound into a single integrated  
work, using hyperlinks and other hypermedia techniques to connect its various  
elements.

That explains, why Marc loves the Laszlo concept so much. The tools he  
worked on made it possible for non-geeks to use the computer in a very  
creative way to create multimedia content.

OL and LZX is the next step, giving that power to engineers, utilizing the  
working environment and best practices they are used to. So somehow there’s  
a connection between Wetop and Wagner. Maybe a good time to start naming our  
internal projects after figures from Wagner operas? ;)

You see, there’s a long story to tell, and this story fascinates not only  
technicians, software developers, user experience designers.

I will start working on a presentation showing this path from the early  
roots of multimedia to the concept of the cinematic user experience which I  
want to use at non-technical meet-ups. Anyone interested in exchanging ideas  
with me from time to time on the whole complex?

Cheers,  
Raju