---
title: '12 habits of mildly effective managers'
date: '2007-07-28T06:45:22-07:00'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=301'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 301
category:
    - Uncategorized
tag: []
post_format: []
---
Like many folks, I have to learn the same lessons over and over again. To help myself remember the important ones, I find myself repeating certain lessons like a mantra. [Scott Evans](http://www.antisleep.com/) joked a while back that these were the “12 habits of mildly effective managers.” Since then I’ve tried to capture these, for the record… I’ve got nine so far:

\#1: **Hiring and retaining good people is the number one job of a good manager.** I try to repeat this to myself every morning when I have deadline and open positions on my team. Even when all heck is breaking loose, I remind myself to make time to chat with the stars on my team. The people who write the code have a wisdom that needs to guide decision making; often, more wisdom than the folks at the top.

\#2: **Never do anything just because an executive told you so.** Now, I’m not saying you should just blow off your boss, but I’ve been in more than a few jobs where 4 or 5 VPs have blown thru while I’m steadily working to deliver the same product. When VP #2 comes along and asks why you are doing xyz, it is pretty lame to say that it was a stupid decision from VP #1. Of course, often the new VP has no idea of the repercussions of some previous era decisions and you are stuck with the consequences. So, when you can’t say no, you learn how to say “YES! we could do that if…” or “Let me share with you some information which may influence your decision” or when you’re desperate and daring, you just ignore him, keep on trucking, and hope the revolving door turns quickly. In the end, you are responsible for your decisions, no matter who is above you in the org chart, do the right thing, or find a new company.

\#3 No more dumb stuff

\#4 Don’t outsource the fun stuff.

\#5: Don’t lie. (in stark contrast to rule #4 in “[work as play](https://www.ultrasaurus.com/sarahblog/archives/000129.html)“) There’s a fine line between setting aggressive schedules and setting your team up to fail. Make sure you know the difference.

\#6: Don’t release on a Friday.

\#7: Defer early.

\#8: Manage through the bug database.  
\#9: When one person misses a deadline, the whole team doesn’t get more time.  
\#10: Never add a new feature the night before a release candidate.  
\#11: Never run a test on a release candidate that you have not run in the past month.