---
title: 'cross-platform smartphone development rant'
date: '2011-01-01T12:38:37-08:00'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=3037'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 3037
category:
    - Uncategorized
tag: []
post_format: []
---
I think most folks know I’m a fan of Rhodes. (Disclaimer: My company is in their developer network and they refer gigs to us. Generally we work directly for whatever company wants the mobile app, but we have done a little work for Rhomobile, most recently collaborating on the Android/jQTouch compatibility)

Rhodes (the client framework) is now MIT licensed and actually works across 4 platforms with relatively little hassles — you get rake tasks to build the mobile apps, which is frigging awesome. The MVC framework is very comfortable (different from Rails, but familiar patterns). It’s pretty useful even without using their commercial RhoSync product. They’ve even got a built-in test framework now. They have come a long way in the year or so I’ve been working with the platform.

PhoneGap is fine for what it does, but it is more raw than Rhodes and the build process is quite different per platform. When working on our book \[1\], iPhone and Android were pretty easy, but it took some wrangling to get BB to work and we didn’t even try for WinMo or Symbian, which are generally tougher toolsets. The other thing that sucks about PhoneGap is they you pretty much make a copy of their code and build your app with it and there isn’t a clear workflow to upgrade the next version of PhoneGap. Rhodes is a gem, which makes it easy. \[Disclaimer: I haven’t used PhoneGap in a few months, these things change fast, so maybe it has gotten better. Also, probably like many folks on this list, I like the Ruby tools\]

Appcellerator is iPhone and Android, has announced BlackBerry, but I’m skeptical that they will bother to make it work before BB releases WebKit-based browser later this year. Vidal wrote that chapter, so I don’t have hands-on experience. Folks seem to like it, but so far I haven’t seen anything that yet motivates me to dive in.

On the HTML UI side…  
I spent 10 years writing procedural code to create buttons and menus with Director, Flash, MFC, and all those pre-cocoa Mac frameworks that I’ve now forgotten the names of, then I spent 10 years creating GUIs with declarative XML (OpenLaszlo) and HTML/CSS. Sure you need code to make a UI work, but I’m partial to the declarative approach to layout. Therefore, I’d rather use jQTouch than Sencha. The Sencha folk are positioning themselves as next generation everything and they’ve certainly done a lot of good work, but I’m not a fan of the syntax, they don’t (yet) have all of the widgets I would want on mobile or maybe I just couldn’t find ’em.

To Alex’s point about the lack of jQTouch docs…. all of the docs are weak, some suck less than others, but this is open source folks! When evaluating this stuff, you need to look at the alternatives. Developing for mobile is painful. If you think cross-browser on the desktop is bad — it is worse on mobile. The tools are awful (although better than they used to be) and proprietary which means that there are limited things we can do to make them better. Despite all that, it is inevitable that we as developers will be building the same applications that need to run across multiple mobile platforms.

God bless the folks building these open source cross-platform frameworks. Life is too short and the opportunities too many for us all to be implementing the same bits!