---
title: 'what is the internet?'
date: '2011-08-30T18:16:09-07:00'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=3396'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 3396
category:
    - general
tag: []
post_format: []
---
It’s more than “[series of tubes](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Series_of_tubes)“… each component is actually fairly simple, but connected together and layered on top of each other, it all gets quite fancy. Especially in today’s ecosystem of virtualized servers and web services that serve a global economy.

San Francisco is filled with people who work in or with tech companies, and there are even some folks creating businesses around web applications who could cut through problems quicker or just create the right solutions if they just knew a little more about the tech they use every day. This insight led us to create a [new class at Blazing Cloud](http://www.eventbrite.com/event/1974420545) to explain the core concepts in collaboration with Brian Doll, who will be teaching the class.

Class 1: History and Core Concepts

- History of the Internet
- The difference between the Internet and the Web
- What is the role of the browser vs the web server?

Class 2: How is it all connected?

- What’s a protocol? What’s a socket?
- How is the internet physically connected?
- Hostnames, DNS (what is TTL and why do I care?)
- Routers and Firewalls

Class 3: The Browser

- The Browser, including cookies
- How targeted advertising works
- User-agent, and other stuff the browser sends about you (analytics)

Class 4: Identity, Privacy and Security

- What are privacy and security implications to things I do routinely?
- What should my web app do and not do?
- HTTPS / VPNs (Virtual Private Networks)

Class 5: Anatomy of a an application

- Web vs. Mobile vs. Desktop
- How site X works? (Facebook, Gmail, Twitter, DropBox …)
- How does this happen at scale? (Load balancing)
- How do development teams manage software

Class 6: The Cloud

- virtualization, EC2/S3 web services, “semantic web”
- cloud-hosted services (distributed computing)

I think this will be a fun class, starting in just two weeks. There’s a lot buzzwords with some real tech behind them… some of these things are pretty hard to Google for. If you are in SF, come [join the class](http://www.eventbrite.com/event/1974420545). If you have any questions, leave a comment or feel free to reach out to me directly.