---
title: 'reflecting on the impact of steve jobs'
date: '2011-10-06T18:50:41-07:00'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=3415'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 3415
category:
    - general
tag: []
post_format: []
---
I learned to program on an Apple II. When starting my first company, where we wrote video software for the Mac, I read Inside Mac volumes I – IV cover to cover. Apple was the first company that not only produced Human Interface Guidelines, but also offered software components and APIs to developers that made it harder to software with a bad UI. Instead of being constrained by the Human Interface Guidelines, as developers, we could innovate in other areas that were less well defined.

In recent years, it has been delightful to watch the iconic Steve Jobs in his relentless pursuit of innovation. The majority of stories in the popular press around innovation focus on the 20-something college dropout boy geniuses (e.g. Who will be the next Mark Zuckerberg?). Sure Jobs did amazing stuff in his 20s, but more impressive his is long track record of invention. In his 50s, he was still an industry leader.

 Most of all I appreciate that Steve Jobs created a space where craftsmanship was valued, where delight was the love child of usability and beauty. In the early 80s, people said that Americans would not pay more for quality — in the American market, companies had to win by being cheap and just good enough. Steve changed that — first with the Mac, and later with the iPod, the iPhone and the iPad.