---
title: 'women leaders who inspire me'
date: '2011-10-21T05:40:53-07:00'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=3422'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 3422
category:
    - general
tag: []
post_format: []
---
I was interviewed yesterday for a study on women’s leadership, now and in the future. I really wanted to support the research because I see the gender imbalance in leadership positions across industries and am interested in why that is and more interested in how that could change. Prepping for the interview, I came up with a list of women leaders I admire:

Posthumous  
– Anita Borg, Emmy Noether, Ada Lovelace

Living:  
– Hilary Mason  
– Mitch Baker  
– Shaherose Charania  
– Valerie Aurora  
– Leah Culver  
– Amy Hoy  
– [Heather Meeker](http://www.gtlaw.com/People/HeatherJMeeker), expert in open source law  
– Cindy Gallup  
– Cyan Bannister

I value individuality in teamwork, Lennon &amp; McCarthy vs. follow-the-leader.

I don’t believe my leadership skills have anything to do with gender. I do believe, because of legacy cultural issues, right now women have more freedom to create their own paths, from everything from dress code to work hours to leadership style. I know that not all women have options, we need education and a whole set of skills and often women need to work harder than some of the white guys to get a foot in the door. Of course, so does the majority of the population of the United States. Nonetheless, bias is a major issue in our society and we need to figure out how to adjust our stereotypes and initial impressions to reflect reality.