---
title: 'the influence of cinematic perception'
date: '2008-01-03T03:41:58-08:00'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=346'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 346
category:
    - Uncategorized
tag: []
post_format: []
---
Lev Manovich writes [Cinema as Cultral Interface](http://www.manovich.net/TEXT/cinema-cultural.html). While I found much of the text hard to follow, there are some gems in this essay. I’d advise you skip the intro and start reading at “Cultural Interfaces.”

Overlapping windows of HCI can be understood as a synthesis of two basic techniques of twentieth-century cinema: temporal montage and montage within a shot. In temporal montage, images of different realities follow each other in time, while in montage within the shot, these different realities co-exist within the screen. The first technique defines the cinematic language as we know it; the second is used more rarely. An example of this technique is the dream sequence in The Life of an American Fireman by Edward Porter in 1903, in which an image of a dream appears over a man’s sleeping head. Other examples include the split screens beginning in 1908 which show the different interlocutors of a telephone conversation; superimpositions of a few images and multiple screens used by the avant-garde filmmakers in the 1920’s; and the use of deep focus and a particular compositional strategy (for instance, a character looking through a window, such as in Citizen Kane, Ivan the Terrible and Rear Window) to juxtapose close and far away scenes.\[26\]

As testified by its popularity, temporal montage works. However, it is not a very efficient method of communication: the display of each additional piece of information takes time to watch, thus slowing communication. It is not accidental that the European avant-garde of the 1920’s inspired by the engineering ideal of efficiency, experiments with various alternatives, trying to load the screen with as much information at one time as possible.\[27\] In his 1927 Napoleon Abel Gance uses a multiscreen system which shows three images side by side. Two years later, in A Man with a Movie Camera (1929) we watch Dziga Vertov speeding up the temporal montage of individual shots, more and more, until he seems to realize: why not simply superimpose them in one frame? Vertov overlaps the shots together, achieving temporal efficiency — but he also pushes the limits of a viewer’s cognitive capacities. His superimposed images are hard to read — information becomes noise. Here cinema reaches one of its limits imposed on it by human psychology; from that moment on, cinema retreats, relying on temporal montage or deep focus, and reserving superimpositions for infrequent cross-dissolves.

In window interface, the two opposites — temporal montage and montage within the shot — finally come together. The user is confronted with a montage within the shot — a number of windows present at once, each window opening up into its own reality. This, however, does not lead to the cognitive confusion of Vertov’s superimpositions because the windows are opaque rather than transparent, so the user is only dealing with one of them at a time. In the process of working with a computer, the user repeatedly switches from one window to another, i.e. the user herself becomes the editor accomplishing montage between different shots. In this way, window interface synthesizes two different techniques of presenting information within a rectangular screen developed by cinema.

This last example shows once again the extent to which human-computer interfaces — and, the cultural interfaces which follow them — are cinematic, inheriting cinema’s particular ways of organizing perception, attention and memory. Yet it also demonstrates the cognitive distance between cinema and the computer age. For the viewers of the 1920’s, the temporal replacement of one image by another, as well as superimposition of two images together were an aesthetic and perceptual event, a truly modern and unfamiliar experience. The cut from one image to another was a meaningful, even stressful event, because audiences had to assimilate a sequence in a different fashion than they were previously used to in other cultural forms.\[28\] Film directors exploited the novelty of this strategy as an effective way of creating meaning. At the end of the century, however, anaesthetized first by cinema and then by television channel flipping, we feel at home with a number of overlapping windows on a computer screen. We switch back and forth between different applications, processes, tasks. Not only are we no longer shocked, but in fact we feel angry when a computer occasionally crashes because we opened too many windows at once.

Cinema, the major cultural form of the twentieth century, has found a new life as the toolbox of a computer user. Cinematic means of perception, of connecting space and time, of representing human memory, thinking, and emotions become a way of work and a way of life for millions in the computer age. Cinema’s aesthetic strategies have become basic organizational principles of computer software. The window in a fictional world of a cinematic narrative has become a window in a datascape. In short, what was cinema has become human-computer interface.