---
title: 'Flash is not an application development platform'
date: '2008-12-18T07:07:36-08:00'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=462'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 462
category:
    - Uncategorized
tag: []
post_format: []
---
Ok, some of these things are really bugging me (especially the top two on the list)

– no way to undo text typing changes

– Settings… (This should be called Flash Player Settings: with the addition of context menu items, the “Settings…” menu may appear to control application setting; however, if someone picks that menu item when an iframe is partially obscuring the app, it will not appear to the end-user and the app will seem to hang.

– lack of text selection persistent when switching between apps  
– This script has caused the Flash Player to run slowly…  
– can’t drag &amp; drop a file  
– what if your application needs http auth?\*  
– sometime network operations fail\*

\*we’ve worked around these

As you all know I have been working closely with Flash since Flash 5. I love the Flash Player. I love creating Flash applications. However, there is a specific set of problems which may be deal breakers. I’ve spent the last two years building an email application for the Flash runtime, and am already working on more new and exciting applications. I would like these to be delivered using the Flash platform, but if these issues aren’t fixed, DHTML may be a more suitable runtime. I don’t want to sound threatening, it’s just a business reality. These issues affect Goowy and Flex, as much as they affect us:

1\) The user can’t undo text edit operations.  
2\) scroll wheel doesn’t work on the Mac  
3\) Settings… menu item is very problemation  
a) when the user chooses “Settings…” the application should get an event  
so that it can hide DHTML frames and prevent the app from locking up  
b) the menu should be called “Flash Player Settings…” (this is, of course,  
my fault — I think I named it back in Flash Player 6)  
c) our application has settings, but Flash prohibits us from having a menu  
item named “Mail Settings…”  
4\) cut/copy/paste keyboard shortcuts do not work consisently  
5\) upload doesn’t work over https (I hear this works in 8.5)  
6\) http authentication is unsupported  
7\) styled text is almost unusable due to bugs and inconsistent behavior  
top issues are:  
a) requires the character to the left be formatted (you should be able  
to insert formatting without inserting a character)  
b) paragraph formatting (bulletted lists, center/right justify)  
problem (a) means you have to have a space at the beginning of a line  
this makes the feature unusable (based on real user feedback)  
8\) need to be able to get mouseover events for a link  
(to display URL elsewhere)  
8\) text editing: people expect that they can double-click to select a word  
10\) ActionScript execution is slow (I hear 8.5 fixes this to)

Re-formatted  
For the last two years, I’ve been leading Laszlo’s Applications team. Our biggest effort to date has been Laszlo Mail — you can see it at http://www.laszlomail.com. As a full-fledged email application, Laszlo Mail stretches the capabilities not only of Laszlo’s development platform, but of the Flash player itself. And as a representative, serious, GUI application, we believe that Laszlo Mail’s problems are reflective of broader issues with the Flash player, and would affect other users of the Flash player, including anyone building a Flex application.

Many of these issues surround text and text performance. Obviously this isn’t Flash’s strong suit at this point. But given the application focus, we believe it needs attention.

Here’s what we’ve run up against:

1\) Fundamentally, the Flash text control is too simplistic, and too buggy, to host serious applications that are text-centric.  
Undo cannot be implemented given the hooks the text field provides (this needs to be available to the end user from keyboard shortcut or context menu)  
Rich text editing cannot be implemented reliably given the hooks provided  
Cut/copy/paste via keyboard is not reliable (in Firefox)  
Cannot render HTML meaningfully  
In-line images rendering with HTML text do not always draw correctly  
Text measurement is unreliable

2\) “Settings” right-click menu item is problematic  
Users think “Settings” applies to the application being run, not the player  
The player prohibits the addition of an item with the word “Settings” in it  
Selecting “Settings” when there is an overlaid iframe will render any app unusable

3\) Other application-centric functionality is missing  
HTTP authentication is not supported  
Mouse scroll wheel doesn’t work on the Mac

noew: Flash 10 … only supports 10.4 and higher