---
title: 'crowdfunding as a lean startup experiment'
date: '2014-07-13T09:49:32-07:00'
status: draft
exported_permalink: '/?p=5109'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 5109
category:
    - Uncategorized
tag: []
post_format: []
---
Late last year we decided to use crowdfunding to validate the next big leap for Mightyverse — we would design our next generation app and then if enough people funded the project, I would devote my full time effort to building it. In parallel with designing the app, I read everything I could about successful crowdfunding campaigns.

I learned 4 things that make a huge difference in success:

1. video includes faces and voices of the founders
2. multiple founders
3. ask under $10K
4. experience running a successful crowdfunding campaign

We have multiple founders and yet-to-be-film video content was easy enough to adjust. However, $10K wasn’t really enough to get us where we needed to be with the software and there was really nothing to be done about lack of experience running a crowdfunding campaign… or so I thought.

Then, as we were in the final steps of our app design, really pushing ourselves to make it a fun and engaging, we started [paper prototyping](http://blog.mightyverse.com/2014/05/making-a-game-out-of-learning-a-language/) game-like interaction. It dawned on us that one of our prototypes worked really well as a stand-alone, real-world card game. It only required one speaker of the language that everyone else was learning, and that is exactly the makeup of a language class or parent who wants to teach their kids their own native language. We decided to gain experience running a crowdfunding campaign and engaging our target audience with this deceptively simple card game.

This was not an easy decision. Our vision for our company is as a global language community, embracing the diversity of language, enabling native speakers all over the world to help each other learn through crowdsourced videos of recorded phrases. We were not pivoting to become a card game company.

We had struggled to create sustained engagement with language learners in advance of building our dream product. The current [Mightyverse](http://www.mightyverse.com/) site is really the tip-of-the-iceberg — with less than 100 speakers using our very early stage desktop app for recording phrases, we the site gets quite a bit of traffic, but the rest of the people use it like a visual phrase dictionary and there is really little there to drive engagement. Meeting in person with language learners has been fruitful; however, we really wanted to scale up our group and focus on just a few languages when developing our next generation app.

Customer development (Drive excitement) — find a group of engaged language learners, professional teachers, and polyglots.

The Process

Play testing  
Making the video  
Instructions  
What is fun?

What We Learned About Crowdfunding

- 30% of funds raised are from friends &amp; family
- campaigns that launch with more than 30% of funding are significantly more successful
- early success drives momentum
- personal emails make a huge difference

What We Learned About Our Business

We got much better at drafting emails, social media outreach, telling our story