---
title: 'software that makes me happy'
date: '2015-03-15T15:01:29-07:00'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=5467'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 5467
category:
    - Uncategorized
tag: []
post_format: []
---
The pinnacle of software design is when there is such a clear model of how it works that you can guess which features “ought” to be there and then you look where they ought to be, and there they are. Or when someone tells you about a feature of an app you are using and you think “of course.” It is sadly a rare software product that achieves this uniformly. I’ll highlight three examples…

1\) Slack

2\) Google docs

3\) Rails  
There are a lot of things I don’t love about Rails, but in web development there is are so many things that come up again and again when you want to express things in words. From pluralize to expressing dates and times, Rails has that all built in. Today I wanted to concatenate a list of strings into a sentence with “and” and I found:  
\[code\]  
puts “Elements are: #{\[“element 1”, “element 2”, “element 3″\].to\_sentence}.”  
\[/code\]  
which, of course, I found on [stack overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/7141942/how-to-transform-an-array-in-a-sentence)

4\) Stack Overflow  
I just type my error messages or a human language description of what I want to do with some programming language keywords, and stackoverflow almost always has what I want. This is a great example, of putting your UI where people are. In this modern world of web applications, we can extend the user experience seamlessly into other tools commonly used by your target audience, like Google, Twitter, Facebook, etc. Be careful, when we get this wrong, it can feel invasive and offensive, but when we design it right it’s golden, making people feel happy and productive.