---
title: 'five kinds of power'
date: '2018-03-04T07:19:03-08:00'
status: draft
exported_permalink: '/?p=5896'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 5896
category:
    - Uncategorized
tag: []
post_format: []
---
Working in small and large organizations, in the private sector and the US government, I have thought a lot about the different kinds of decision-making authority. People in different roles have different powers and I have developed a model for how to think about them in order to drive decisions and get things done.

When I first started working in US federal government, I thought a lot about why it’s all so messed up. Why are things so slow? I found myself working with a high number of competent, motivated people, and the work still moved slowly and it took a lot of effort by a lot of people for good, new ideas to get traction.

Over time, I realized that part of the challenge in government is that there are five kinds of power, where in the private companies there are really only two. This is a little bit of a simplification, yet it helped me understand the landscape, work more effectively, and be more empathetic with my government colleagues.

Private Corporations
--------------------

Working in private companies, especially larger ones, or interacting with them from the outside when I ran a consulting business, I learned there are primarily two kinds of power.

1. the official power of the managers (and people recognized by the hierarchy of power that escalates to the CEO)
2. the subject-matter expert without whom no decision is made, usually an individual contributor who is consulted behind-the-scenes or recommends a course of action which is formally adopted by a manager

Understanding who the people are who are involved in the decision is essential to quick decision-making. If you have a meeting with the official decision-maker without first consulting with the subject-matter expert, then usually this is just one of a series of meetings. Even when the manager is a subject-matter expert, you will need the support of the person on the team who you or your team will work with every day. For decisions to be effective and lead to action, you need buy in from multiple levels in the organization.

When I first learned about this, I thought of it as there being a hidden *real* decision-maker, somewhere hidden in the org. I saw a patterns of dysfunctional managers who were incapable of making decisions. Then, as I grew as a manager myself, I realized that I relied on key people on my team who had deep expertise, and it would be crazy for me to make a decision in a particular area without drawing on their experience and wisdom. As I more often led teams that worked with other teams, I saw how the folks who were going to work together needed inform the important preconditions for a project.

I found this most easy to see with decisions that involve Internet security – every engineering team has its official or unofficial security expert. I happen to have a lot of Internet security experience, but I will always loop in the responsible engineer on my team before making a decision. Understanding potential risks and implications in advance of an official decision is helpful when framing how to moved forward on the next steps. So, when you want to get things done, you need to get to know the the official decision-makers *and* the experts, which you can sometimes make happen in the background or settle into a slow series of meetings.

Government
----------

Government has five kinds of power.

First, it has the same two as we see in the private sector:

(1) **Management**: Supervisory power escalates all the way up to the President of the United States, at least in theory; however, the Cabinet is hardly analogous to the C-Suite. There are hundreds of independent agencies, each with its own management hierarchy.  
(2) **Subject Matter Expert**: I saw a great example of subject matter experts from my work at the Smithsonian Institution. Every scientist at the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History is chief decision maker of their own domain. No President, Secretary, or Museum Director is likely to overrule the paleontologists on how to take care of and transport the dinosaur bones. The paleontologists may not get all of the budget they want – it can be hard for them to make something happen; however, with the safety of our scientific heritage in their hands, they have the power to control specific outcomes, which is sometimes only the power to say *no*.

Work in the US government is also affected by political, legal and public power:

(3) **Political power**: The United States has a federated system where each agency has a Secretary or Administrator who is appointed by the President, but the agency has a mission that was set forth by Congress at some point in the past two hundred years. If someone from the White House or Congress invites you to a meeting, you need to make that a priority, regardless of what you and your direct supervisor had planned for you to do this week. Political power is the power to convene and to influence.  
(4) **Legal authority**: When you work for a company, it’s relatively hard to break the law, and fairly easy to get fired. When you work for the government, your job only exists because some folks in congress passed a law and allocated funding for your efforts, so need to be aware of a lot of laws just to do your job. There is a lot of required training so everyone is aware of the laws and the most important requirements; however, those trainings can’t cover everything. The rest is covered by accepted practice and consultations with the Office of General Council. Every agency also has an Inspector General and related folks throughout the agency, who can advise on whether a new idea is actually legal . Once an opinion has been written that something is *illegal*, naturally people stay clear of that activity. This is generally a good practice; however, it can dampen innovation where most laws and regulations were written when the world was different and many new practices are not addressed particularly clearly in the law.  
(5) **Public power**: Public power in government is very different from the private sector where a company must be profitable in order to survive, and while customer needs are important (since they provide the source of revenue), private companies can focus on a specific market and exclude others. While public power can certainly be subverted by special interests, the public can often directly influence the work. In many areas, public notice or even engagement is stipulated by law or regulation. Public perception can often influence funding, and in some cases, government initiatives are directly funded by private philanthropy.

Mostly these power structures have little direct effect on the rank-and-file; however, when someone wants to make a change and do something new, navigating these complex power dynamics can be quite challenging. In US federal government, we have a system where the personnel at the top of every agency changes every four years. When I worked for the US government, I was sometimes amazed that anything could get done at all, yet I was also relieved that we have checks-and-balances in place that allow for our democracy to work (most of the time) and provide some measures of protection to our people.

Getting Things Done
-------------------

I’ve used this map of power roles to quickly navigate large organizations, facilitating decision-making and getting software projects to happen. I’ve also been involved in some bigger movements to create transformational change.

I’ve seen evidence that positive change can happen, which I’m seeing through the ecosystem of the United States Digital Service, 18F, the Presidential Innovation Fellows and the Office of Technology Policy. Each team is working independently with an aligned mission of transforming our government technology to better serve our people. We are aligned in the belief that it is possible to create dramatically better services at significantly lower cost, by applying modern techniques and technologies.