---
title: 'subjective truth, implementation notes'
date: '2017-05-21T18:52:39-07:00'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=5924'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 5924
category:
    - Uncategorized
tag: []
post_format: []
---
Identities of historical figures are composed of a series of accomplishments, evidenced by observations by others or captured by themselves in journals, notebooks and annotated collections. From a historical perspective, we are what we do. We are remembered by the mark we leave on the world, as recorded by our words and the words of others, by photographs, and by the objects we leave behind.

Our understanding of reality is a series of observations about the world that we assemble into a consistent view. When I worked at the Smithsonian Institution, I learned that an artifact is worthless without provenance: where it was found and when. What we think of as fact, is actually a subjective historical record. We can go back in time and observe new events based on collected artifacts, which can change our interpretation of the world. Dinosaurs that were once lizards, are now known to be descended from birds. The Brontosaurus, featured in Flintstones cartoons, is later discovered to have been accidentally identified as a single dinosaur, rather its head was from a Camerasaurus and its body from an Apatasaurus. Our beloved Brontosaurus turns out to be as imaginary as Fred and Barney. What was once based on fact, is in retrospect, pure fiction.

Implementation Notes
--------------------

The realization of such a system in the digital realm needs to have two key properties:

- Human interface that allows for new observations: for new events and accomplishments in the world, as well as new discoveries of history, see earlier post [linking people through history](https://www.ultrasaurus.com/2014/09/linking-people-through-history/)
- System of record that allows for the aggregation of observations into a representation of knowledge

If we accept that subjective observations are our best, perhaps only, path to truth, and we seek to model a system in the digital realm, a traditional object-oriented approach is cumbersome. Most Linked Open Data systems ignore provenance, and do not seek to model the authorship of links. This appears based on the assumption that there exists an objective truth which merely needs to be discovered from the data, rather than an evolving truth. This theory of subjective truth is based on observing the real-world practices of archivists and scientists, along with user research interviews.

My [initial experiments](http://www.slideshare.net/sarah.allen/identities-of-dead-people) followed an object-oriented approach using Named-Entity Recognition to correlate people identified by their archival writings with the collectors of botanical specimens.

Upon reflection, a more natural model might be to apply the event sourcing pattern from Domain-Driven Design (DDD). This would support a series of observations by people over time, which can be folded into a snapshot of currently understood *truth*.

, which I believe was first introduced by Eric Evans in his book…).

“[Events on the outside, on the inside and at the core](http://blog.eventuate.io/2016/02/26/hacksummit-2016-event-driven-microservices-events-on-the-outside-on-the-inside-and-at-the-core/),” by Chris Richardson  
[Event Sourcing in Practice](http://ookami86.github.io/event-sourcing-in-practice/) by Benjamin Reitzammer @benjamin and Johannes Seitz @ookami86