---
title: 'elixir/erlang: language encodes wisdom'
date: '2017-06-10T15:33:15-07:00'
status: draft
permalink: '/?p=6268'
author: sarah
excerpt: ''
type: post
id: 6268
category:
    - Uncategorized
tag: []
post_format: []
---
The Erlang &amp; Elixir Factory conference brings diverse communities together, with deep experiences solving problems across different domains. Two languages, Erlang and Elixir, have common principles, expressed differently. I gave the [keynote talk](http://www.erlang-factory.com/sfbay2017/sarah-allen.html) for this conference in March, which was the first time that Elixir was given prominence in the conference name, although there had been many Elixir talks at the conference in past years.

I was invited to speak at the conference because of my experience bringing communities together. I founded [RailsBridge](http://railsbridge.org/) which we refactored into the non-tech-specific teaching organization, [Bridge Foundry](https://bridgefoundry.org/). Just last year, I was delighted to attend the first [ElixirBridge](http://elixirbridge.org/). Bridge Foundry, includes a network of 8 Bridges, with a mission to “empower people with technology through teaching and facilitating access,  
enlarging the community of people who give back and teach others.” Bridge Foundry’s programs are focused on outreach to people who are underrepresented in tech. Through our workshops and other activities we are transforming tech culture, creating the environment in which we live and work.

The Elixir and Erlang communities face similar diversity challenges as many technology communities which are open to anyone in theory, yet are really only accessible to people with a high level of privilege, in terms of access to technology, a high level of technical skill and free time to explore a programming language where there aren’t a large number of available jobs. However, the challenge facing the Erlang &amp; Elixir communities stems from a different kind of diversity — one of background and of values.

Elixir was first presented by its creator, Jose Valim, at one of the Erlang Factory events and as it became more and more popular, the number of talks increased. This year it reached the point where the two are now treated as equal citizens in setting the conference schedule. It is notable that Elixir and Erlang are being used to solve very different problems. The two communities, whilst very different in nature, develop in the same ecosystem. Since Erlang libraries can be called from Elixir code, and Elixir libraries can be called from Erlang code, the work of each community benefits the other. (Both Erlang and Elixir compile to the same bytecode which executes on same BEAM virtual machine.)

In talking to many people in each community, I found some people who delighted in learning both languages, yet that seemed to be a minority. Amongst others there had been some tension. Erlang developers have a strong computer science background and tend to solve complex back-end engineering problems. (Some Elixir developers felt that their communications were often more complex than needed, and all agreed that the getting started materials were not well-developed.) The first wave of Elixir developers came from a Ruby background and focused mainly on front-end development and APIs. There’s an ethos in that community that good communication = good code, and a su